# Microstrip Patch Antenna, Microstrip Low Pass Filter and Microstrip Power Divider

Designed and fabricated a linearly polarised rectangular/square microstrip patch antenna on a given FR-4 epoxy substrate of thickness 1.6 mm and dielectric constant 4.4 at a frequency of 2.4 GHz.<br>
Micro strip antennas are low-profile antennas. A metal patch mounted at a ground level with a di-electric material in-between constitutes a Micro strip or Patch Antenna. These are very low size antennas having low radiation. The radiation pattern of microstrip or patch antenna is broad. It has low radiation power and narrow frequency bandwidth. Microstrip antennas find many applications as they are light weight, conformable to surface and inexpensive to manufacture using printed-circuit technology. Microstrip patch antennas are becoming increasingly useful because they can be printed directly onto a circuit board.<br>
RETURN LOSS: The return loss represents how much feeding power that was reflected back at the port of patch antenna as a result of the mismatches between the transmission line and the feeding points. When the antenna and transmission line are not perfectly matched, reflections at the antenna port travel back towards the source and cause a standing wave to form. Good antenna must have high return loss.<br>
VSWR: VSWR shows how much power is reflected back from the antenna towards the source. The good value that accepted for antenna is 1 VSWR 2. If the VSWR value equals 1, means all of the given power to the antenna is transmitted.<br>
RADIATION PATTERN: The energy radiated by antenna is represented by radiation pattern of the antenna. There are a few types of radiation pattern such as 3D radiation pattern, 2D radiation pattern and Lobe formation radiation pattern.<br>
GAIN: The gain of an antenna is defined as the ratio of intensity in a given direction to the radiation intensity that is obtained if the power accepted by the antenna is radiated in an isotropic manner. An antenna is not a lossless system, and some energy entering the antenna terminals is lost due to heat losses etc. The gain of an antenna describes the rates of power transmitted to peak radiation through isotropic source.<br>
Construction & Working of Micro strip Antennas: Micro strip antenna consists of a very thin metallic strip placed on a ground plane with a di-electric material in-between. The radiating element and feed lines are placed by the process of photo-etching on the di-electric material. Usually, the patch or micro-strip is choosen to be square, circular or rectangular in shape for the ease of analysis and fabrication.<br>
For a rectangular patch, the length L of the element is usually L <λg/2 (where λg is the guided wavelength in the substrate). Thicker substrates with lower dielectric constant provide better efficiency and larger bandwidth but at the expense of larger element size. Thin substrates with higher dielectric constants lead to smaller element sizes, minimize coupling, but are less efficient and have relatively smaller bandwidths. Here we taking the length of the metal patch is λ/2. When the antenna is excited, the waves generated within the di-electric undergo reflections and the energy is radiated from the edges of the metal patch, which is very low. The following image shows a micro-strip or patch antenna.<br><br><br><br>
Designed, fabricated and measured a stepped-impedance low-pass filter having maximally flat response and cut-off frequency of 2.5 GHz with an attenuation of more than 20 dB at 4GHz. The line impedance of filter is 50 Ω, highest line impedance is 120 Ω, and the lowest is 20 Ω.<br><br>
THEORY:
A filter is a two-port network used to control the frequency response at a certain point in an RF or microwave system by providing transmission at frequencies within the pass-band of the filter and attenuation in the stop-band of the filter. Typical frequency responses include lowpass, high-pass, band-pass, and band-reject characteristics.<br><br>
LUMPED ELEMENTS: If the size of an element is smaller than the wavelength of applied signals, then it is a lumped elements. The effect of wave propagation can be neglected. There are only minimal phase difference between the input and output signals in lumped elements. The size of lumped elements is less than 1/20 times the operating guided wavelength. Example: Resistors, capacitors and inductors.
MAXIMALLY FLAT RESPONSE: The frequency response of the Butterworth filter is maximally flat in the paasband. A Butterworth filter is a type of signal processing filter designed to have a frequency response as flat as possible in the passband. The number of reactive elements used in the filter circuit will decide the order of the filter.<br><br>
INSERTION LOSS: Insertion loss is the amount of energy that a signal loses as it travels along a cable link. It is a natural phenomenon that occurs for any type of transmission—whether it's electricity or data. This reduction of signal, also called attenuation, is directly related to the length of a cable—the longer the cable, the greater the insertion loss. Insertion loss is also caused by any connection points along a cable link (i.e., connectors and splices).<br><br>
TRANSMISSION COEFFICIENT:The transmission coefficient is used in physics and electrical-engineering when wave-propagation in a medium containing discontinuities is considered. A transmission coefficient describes the amplitude, intensity, or total power of a transmitted wave relative to an incident wave.<br><br>
Return loss (S11) and Forward Transmission (S21): S parameter describes the relationship between the terminals and input-output ports of antenna system in terms of power. Return loss of the proposed filter is also called as the S11 parameter. S11 parameter represents the amount of power at input port of LPF which is reflected back and the remaining power which is transmitting in LPF. It is basically the reflected power calculation. S21 represents the power received at port 2 due to the excitation at port 1. For instance if the S21 is 0 dB means that all the power entering at port 1 is delivered to the port 2. If the S21 is -10 dB means that only 10% of the entering power at port 1 is reaching at the port 2. Same analogy can be taken for the reflected power at port 1.<br><br><br><br>
Designed, fabricated and measured an equal-split (3-dB) Wilkinson power divider for mobile communication operating at 915 MHz.<br><br>

THEORY:
Power dividers are passive microwave components used for power division or power combining. In power division, an input signal is divided into two (or more) output signals of lesser power, while a power combiner accepts two or more input signals and combines them at an output port. Three-port networks take the form of T-junctions and other power dividers, while four-port networks take the form of directional couplers and hybrids. Power dividers usually provide in-phase output signals with an equal power division ratio (3 dB), but unequal power division ratios are also possible. Directional couplers can be designed for arbitrary power division.<br><br>
       A wide variety power dividers were invented and characterized at the MIT Radiation Laboratory in the 1940s. These included E- and H-plane waveguide T-junctions, the Bethe hole coupler, multihole directional couplers, the Schwinger coupler, the waveguide magic-T, and various types of couplers using coaxial probes. In the mid-1950s through the 1960s, many of these couplers were reinvented to use stripline or microstrip technology. The increasing use of planar lines also led to the development of new types of couplers and dividers, such as the Wilkinson divider, the branch line hybrid, and the coupled line directional coupler.<br><br>
